---
id: "releases"
hide_title: true
---

# Releases

## Status

accepted

## Context

The modularity of our web application affords us the ability to speed up its release process.

By avoiding the rebuild and release of modules which haven't changed since the previous release we
have the opportunity to maintain a quick release pipeline.

We also want to be able to run a production build locally or during CI without the need to rebuild
modules that haven't changed. This can be seen as trialling a future release so shares many
characteristics with an actual release and is the reason it's considered in this ADR.

## Decision

The first step is to build only modules which have changed since the previous release. We can
leverage [Lerna's](https://github.com/lerna/lerna#--since-ref) `--since` option to target these
modules.

    lerna run build --cd-version prerelease --since

Each UI module when built outputs a `dist/index.<hash>.js` file. This is the minified source bundle
for the module, to be later deployed and served to the website.

After the updated modules are built we'll version and release their artifacts as individual packages
to [NPM](http://npmjs.org).

We'll publish the `shell` module with every release. This will contain a generated
`dist/package.json` with strictly versioned dependencies to every dependent ui module. The `shell`
will contain a generated `dist/index.template.html` file to be populated during deployment.

With these in place we can run a deployment of any version of the web app by pulling down the
corresponding `shell` version and `npm install`ing its `dist/package.json`. Each installed
dependency will contain its `index.<hash>.js` file along with any other assets to be uploaded and
served. We can populate and upload the `index.html` from the `dist/index.template.html` with
references to these assets.

Leveraging `npm install` for deployments provides an inbuilt caching mechanism, avoiding the
download of packages we've previously deployed. This should greatly improve deployment times.

Here's how we'll generate a release using `lerna`.

`lerna publish -m \"Release %s [skip CI]\" --cd-version prerelease --yes`.

This asks `lerna` to tag and publish updated modules to NPM. The command will run a number of
lifecycle scripts described below.

1.  `prerelease` Before applying the new tag to updated modules.
    - Add a timestamp to `shell` module's `package.json` and commit it. This change will ensure the
      `shell` module is released along with other updated modules.
    - Check to see if we need to increment the pre-release tag given the current month and year.
1.  `version` Lerna has incremented the version of updated modules but not committed anything yet.
    At this point we generate the `shell` module's `dist/package.json` referencing the latest module
    versions. We also generate the `dist/index.template.html`.
1.  `postversion` Version updates have now been committed and the repository tagged. Before we
    publish to NPM run through updated modules and switch their `package.json` `dependencies` object
    to `optionalDependencies`. We do this so that during deployment we can install all ui modules
    without pulling down their dependencies. These aren't needed during a deployment as they've been
    bundled into the `index.<hash>.js` file. NPM does not provide a way to avoid production
    dependency installation so making them optional is the best we can do. An install would then
    look like `npm install --production --no-optional`
1.  `postrelease` Publish has completed so reset the local changes we made to `package.json` files
    in the previous step.

Note: The `[skip CI]` referenced during `lerna` publish ensures we don't trigger another Bitbucket
Pipeline CI build when Lerna commits the updated module versions.

### Running Locally

Given credentials to our private NPM account any developer or CI system can run any production build
locally.

```shell
yarn prod // run prod locally including unversioned changes to modules
yarn prod latest // run the last release locally
yarn prod v1.0.0-1802.3 // run a specific release locally (useful for debugging issues)
```

The `prod` script will mirror much of the same logic as a deployment script (separate ADR). The main
difference is the first example, where we want to run a production build but include updates we're
working on. In this case any UI module with a local `dist/index.<hash>.js` will be targeted over the
`latest` release found on NPM for that module. Any module without a locally built index file will
attempt to pull down the last released version.

Running `yarn build` will generate `dist` folders for modules which have changed since the last
release.

If a developer doesn't have credentials to pull remote packages, they can run `yarn build:all`
before running `yarn prod`. This ensures all `dist` directories are populated.

## Consequences

We've geared our approach of web app development to continuous delivery. Central to this is a quick
and reliable release and deployment pipeline. These updates should ensure that as we scale to many
modules and squads our release and deployment times remain optimal.
