---
id: "routing"
hide_title: true
---

# Routing

## Status

accepted

## Context

From the users perspective, navigating a Single Page Application (SPA) should be no different from
navigating any other standard website. This means, for example, that their forward/back buttons
should work as expected or that refreshing a page should remain on the same content. Seeing as the
'page' does not actually change in a SPA, a routing solution is required manage this aspect of the
browser. This includes functions such as detecting changes in the URL, cancelling the page change
and rendering the appropriate component for that route.

This router should be able to handle and match multiple styles of routes including:

- parameter passing on routes, e.g. /foo/{id}
- nested routes, e.g. /foo/bar/baz
- performance should be good

Like to haves:

- Allow modules to define their own routes
- Simple to use api
- Possibility for SSR in the future
- Library size should be small
- Good support from community

## Decision

The decision has been to utilise React-Router v4 or greater.

This will affect the way that routes are setup throughout the application. Each module will be in
charge of it's own set of routes - this means, for example, that the top level module will be in
charge of the router and top level routes. Where as another module that has child routes should be
defining it's routes, preferably at the top level of that module.

e.g. Main.js

```
<Router>
    <Switch>
        <Route exact path="/" component={Home}>
        <ModuleRoute path="/foo" moduleId="fooModule" />
    <Switch>
</Router>
```

FooModule.js

```
<Switch>
    <Route exact path="/foo" component={FooMain} />
    <Route path="/foo/items component={FooItems} />
    <Route path="/foo/item/:id" component={FooItem} />
</Switch>
```

With the url of "domain.com/foo/items/10" the only component to be rendered will be the "FooItem"
component.

With this setup, the main entry point will purely be in charge of determining when a module should
be loaded. It's then up to the module to define what will be shown at that url and sub urls after.
Points of interest:

- Property `exact` should be used for 'index' routes
  - But not used for module index routes, that way all routes under that url are delegated to the
    module
- `ModuleRoute` is a helper component that is both a route and loads a module from the given id
- The `Switch` component is to be used when only one component of a list is to be rendered at a time
  - It's OK to use/nest multiple `Switch` components if multiple components should be shown for a
    route
  - e.g.

```
<>
    <Module moduleId="customer-support">
    <Switch>
        <Route exact path="foo" component={FooMain}>
        <Route path="/foo/items component={FooItems}>
            <Switch>
                <Route path="foo/items/add" component={FooAdd} />
                <Route path="foo/items/remove" component={FooRemove} />
            </Switch>
        </Route>
    </Switch>
</>
```

With react-router it's possible to declare routes even further down the component tree. However, for
the sake of clarity when reading the code, it would be best if the convention was that each module
declares all it's routes at the top level of that module. That way it can be quite predicable as to
where to look for routes.

## Consequences

The reasoning behind this is that it fits all of the requirements/"like to haves", is well supported
by the community, ensurance performance and last - it already exists.

It was found that while building our own router implementation that a number of the features being
developed were converging towards features already exist (i.e. modules defining routes, nested
routes). It would also mean dealing with edge cases and performance issues manually.

Performance concerns were brought up using the internal-router as some components were being
re-constructed on every route change even though they were common through components.

Other advantages of using this library is that it is already implemented in React with React
components and there is no need to re-implement them or import yet another library. Other routing
examples such as [Page.js](https://visionmedia.github.io/page.js/) are purely a router and lack this
additional step to ease integration and use.

Another advantage of React Router is that it has ample documentation (see
[React Training](https://reacttraining.com/react-router/)) as it is well supported by the community.
This leads to many questions being answered by resources such as StackOverflow, helping with rapid
problem solving and solution suggestions.

A large advantage is gained by being able to have modules define their own routes (which react
router natively supports) such that when they are loaded the routes are added to the route table and
are available for use. This then decouples the main App module (who, until now, had been in charge
of all routes) and the other modules further, allowing for even better dynamic loading.

A shortcoming of using react-router is that we are locked into their implementation and upgrade
path. An example of this being a shortcoming is when a previous project was locked into using React
Router v2 as it dependied upon features unique to it.

We may not actually use every feature within the libray, thus adding bloat to the project size as
this library will have to be included in the 'lib' file and thus required on first load.
